CDCP Spec (#2)
compose-network/specs: cross_domain_composability_protocol.md

6. In case the transaction simulation is successful, it waits for a `NativeDecided` message from the SP.
7. In case there's a timeout (before a `WSDecided` message has been sent) or if the transaction simulation fails but not due to a mailbox write or read error, it sends a `WSDecided(0)` message to the SP, indicating failure and terminates.
8. If a `NativeDecided(0)` message is received from the SP, it removes its transaction (and any created `externalMailbox`) and terminates.
9. If a `NativeDecided(1)` message is received from the SP and its local transaction simulation is successful, it stops the timer (as it no longer will be used) and sends a special transaction to the ER, which populates the mailbox and executes the transaction atomically.
10. If the ER transaction fails, it sends a `WSDecided(0)` message to the SP, indicating failure and terminates.
11. If the ER transaction is successful, it sends a `WSDecided(1)` message to the SP, indicating success and terminates.

The special transaction to the ER, `safe_execute`, allows an atomic execution of the mailbox staging and the main transaction.
It has the following pseudo-code:
```text

> FUNCTION safe_execute(inboxMsgs, outboxMsgs, txs):

Author: Nice!

            writtenCache.add(msg)
            send_mailbox(msg.destChainID, msg)

procedure on MailboxMessage(msg):
    if state != SIMULATING:
        return
    pendingMailbox.append(msg)
    consume_mailbox_and_retry()

procedure consume_mailbox_and_retry():
    consumed = false
    for expected in expectedReads:
        match = find_matching_message(expected, pendingMailbox)
        if match exists:
            remove(expectedReads, expected)
            remove(pendingMailbox, match)
            putInbox.append(match)
            consumed = true
    if consumed:
        run_simulation()

procedure on IntegratedDecided(decision):
    if integratedDecided is not None or state == DONE:
        return
    integratedDecided = decision
    attempt_er_call()

procedure attempt_er_call():
    if state != WAIT_NATIVE_DECIDED or integratedDecided is None:
        return

    if integratedDecided == 0:
        state = DONE
        return    # ISs already rejected

    state = WAIT_ER_RESPONSE
    err = submit_safe_execute_to_ER(putInbox, putOutbox, txs, timeout)
    if err:
        send(SP, WSDecided(0))
    else:
        send(SP, WSDecided(1))
    state = DONE

procedure on_timeout():

>     if state in {SIMULATING, WAIT_NATIVE_DECIDED}:

Author: wrong as it would break atomicity

5. **Wrapped Sequencer (WS)**: An entity that represents the participating external rollup sequencer in the Compose network, having access to the state and execution results of the external rollup.

The SP, NSs, and WS are part of the Compose network and are expected to have direct communication channels between them.
It's assumed that the user sends their request to SP, who will have the responsibility to initiate the protocol execution.
The WS is expected to have a communication channel with the ER.

For now, no byzantine faults are considered in the system.

## Mailbox

Native rollups are assumed to have the standard [`Mailbox`](TODO) contract deployed.
External rollups will have a slightly modified version of the `Mailbox` contract, called `StagedMailbox`.

In the `StagedMailbox`, all messages are pre-populated by the WS:
- `read` is similar to the standard `Mailbox`, in which it's confirmed that the message exists and its data is returned.
- `write` is modified to ensure that the written message was pre-populated by the WS.

We will see how this pre-population works in the protocol description.
Next, we present the `StagedMailbox` contract.

```solidity

> contract StagedMailbox {

Reviewer: we need to decide on the level of implementation details we have in spec

            msg.sender,
            receiver,
            sessionId,
            label
        );

        // If the message does not exist, revert
        if (!createdKeys[key]) {
            revert MessageNotFound();
        }
        // If the message has already been used, revert
        if (usedKeys[key]) {
            revert MessageAlreadyUsed();
        }
        // If data doesn't match the pre-populated message data, revert
        if (keccak256(outbox[key]) != keccak256(data)) {
            revert MessageDataMismatch();
        }

        // Written operation is safe and valid.

        // Mark as used
        usedKeys[key] = true;

        // Get message data
        bytes memory data = outbox[key];

        // Update the chain-specific outbox root
        if (outboxRootPerChain[destChainID] == bytes32(0)) {
            chainIDsOutbox.push(destChainID);
        }
        outboxRootPerChain[destChainID] = keccak256(
            abi.encode(outboxRootPerChain[destChainID], key, data)
        );
    }
}
```

> [!TIP]
> Space optimizations can be made to the contract by letting the `read` and `write` calls automatically remove used messages from storage.

## Protocol

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we still stick with the SP being a coordinator? Or can the sequencers do it independently

Author: The SP is still the coordinator as it knows, via the SBCP, when to start and if it's okay to start it for the participating sequencers.
Later on we can drop this requirement for all (SCP and SBCP) with proper adjustments.

Similarly to the SCP protocol, the SP initiates the execution by sending a start message, `StartCDCP`, to NSs and WS.

Then, each NS runs **exactly** the protocol rules of the [SCP protocol](TODO). Namely:

> 1. Once it receives the `StartCDCP` message from the SP, it starts a timer and selects the transactions from the `xD_transactions` list that are meant for its chain.

Reviewer: this is actually `StartSCP` because you are not describing CDCP yet right?

btw, I think for easier maintenace later on it is fine to delethi this and just leave the SCP link

Author: Yes, we will have a common msg. The lib code already has this. I will align in spec docs and gherkin

2. If a timeout occurs or if a `Vote(0)` message is received (indicates a failure), it sends a `Decided(0)` message to the NSs and a `NativeDecided(0)` message to the WS, and terminates.
3. If it receives a `Vote(1)` message from all NSs, it stops the timer (as it not longer will be used) and sends a `NativeDecided(1)` message to the WS, indicating that the NSs are willing to proceed.
4. Once a `WSDecided(b)` message is received from the WS, it sends a `Decided(b)` message indicating the result to the NSs, and terminates.

Note that, from the above, the SP works as a middle layer between the NSs and WS.
It indicates the viability results from the NSs to the WS, who is now allowed to communicate with the external rollup for including its transaction.
Once the WS receives a response, it indicates the result to the SP, who transmits the result back to the NSs.

The Wrapped Sequencer (WS) has the following rules:
1. Same as NS.
2. Same as NS.
3. Whenever a `stagedMailbox.Write` operation is intercepted and fails:
  - It sends a `Mailbox` message to the counterparty chain sequencer.

>   - It creates a `stagedMailbox.putOutbox` transaction and adds it locally to the transaction list, placing it before the main transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - It creates a `stagedMailbox.putOutbox` transaction and adds it locally to the transaction list, placing it before the transaction triggering the said `Write`.
```

Author: Agree, thanks!

  - Then, it re-starts the transaction simulation going back to step 2.
4. Same as NS.
5. Same as NS.
6. In case the transaction simulation is successful, it waits for a `NativeDecided` message from the SP.
7. In case there's a timeout (before a `WSDecided` message has been sent) or if the transaction simulation fails but not due to a mailbox write or read error, it sends a `WSDecided(0)` message to the SP, indicating failure and terminates.
8. If a `NativeDecided(0)` message is received from the SP, it removes its transaction (and any created `stagedMailbox`) and terminates.

> 9. If a `NativeDecided(1)` message is received from the SP and its local transaction simulation is successful, it stops the timer (as it no longer will be used) and sends a special transaction to the ER, which populates the mailbox and executes the transaction atomically.

Reviewer: you meant a bundle of transactions? not sure what it means to execute a single "transaction atomically"

10. If the ER transaction fails, it sends a `WSDecided(0)` message to the SP, indicating failure and terminates.
11. If the ER transaction is successful, it sends a `WSDecided(1)` message to the SP, indicating success and terminates.

> The special atomic transaction to the ER, `safe_execute`, allows an atomic execution of the mailbox staging and the main transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The special transaction to the ER, `safe_execute`, allows an atomic execution of the mailbox staging and the main transaction.
```
just a regular tx that allows atomic execution of other operations

It has the following pseudo-code:
```solidity

> function safe_execute(stagedInboxMsgs, stagedOutboxMsgs, mainTx) external {

Author: Indeed, a signature from the SP would be another security step, though not strictly necessary as we could rely on some WS's stake.
Plus, aint we thinking of dropping the SP participation either way?

>     // 1. Pre-populate the staged inbox messages

Reviewer 2: We should better define the responsibilities and structure of the SP

Structure:
- A committee of operators
- Selected, potentially, via some dPOS protocol
- Each operator has a signing key

Responsibilities
- Validate the simulation (the messages are correct since once we write to an ER we can't un-write it)
- Validate no transitive dependencies
- Sign (each member of the SP committee) that the tx can safely execute

    for (msg in stagedInboxMsgs) {
        stagedMailbox.putInbox(msg...)
    }
    // 2. Pre-populate the staged outbox messages
    for (msg in stagedOutboxMsgs) {
        stagedMailbox.putOutbox(msg...)
    }
    // 3. Execute the main transaction
    call mainTx();
}
```

> ![cdcp](./images/cdcp.png)

Reviewer 2: I think we discussed that the WS needs to write messages one by one during simulation because otherwise it can't guarantee the actual values during execute (say a msg returns some value from a contract)
